Add lesson on working with Copilot (#3)
Ada-Developers-Academy/independent-ai-topics: working-w-copilot/copilot-in-projects-refactoring.md

#  Copilot in Projects Pt. 2 - Refactoring

## Goals

> We know how to generate code, start a chat, and work with Copilot's tools in VS Code, but what does it look like to apply what we've learned in a project? We'll mosey back to the [hello-books example project](https://github.com/AdaGold/hello-books-api) from Unit 2 to see how we can use Copilot to increase our productivity.

Reviewer: - rephrased to not be an exact copy of the part 1 intro
- avoided unit 2 reference
```suggestion
We've used Copilot to generate new code in a project. Now we're going to see how Copilot can help us refactor existing code. Let's continue our trip back the [hello-books example project](https://github.com/AdaGold/hello-books-api) for a look at some additional ways we can use Copilot to increase our productivity.
```

Our goals for this lesson are to:
- identify where Copilot can assist us with refactoring

> - get more experience adding and updating test cases with Copilot 

Reviewer: - trailing spaces
```suggestion
- get more experience adding and updating test cases with Copilot
```

## Refactoring with Copilot

> Writing new code with Copilot is great, but a significant portion of software development involves refactoring and updating existing code. We got a little taste of updating code with the `Book` class, but we're going to revisit a scenario that we've seen before – refactoring the `validate_book` function into a more generic function that we can use for any model. 

Reviewer: - em-dash
- trailing spaces
```suggestion
Writing new code with Copilot is great, but a significant portion of software development involves refactoring and updating existing code. We got a little taste of updating code with the `Book` class, but we're going to revisit a scenario that we've seen before—refactoring the `validate_book` function into a more generic function that we can use for any model.
```

For this section of the lesson, we're going to check out a different `hello-books` branch, [`07b-from-dict-refactor`](https://github.com/AdaGold/hello-books-api/tree/07b-from-dict-refactor), as the starting point.

### !callout-info

## Saving Project Changes

> If we forked the `hello-books` repo and want to keep any local changes that we made in the previous part of the lesson, we recommend pausing to create a new branch from the current one then pushing that code up before checking out the `07b-from-dict-refactor` branch. 

Reviewer: - added why we need to do this
```suggestion
If we forked the `hello-books` repo and want to keep any local changes that we made in the previous part of the lesson, we recommend pausing to create a new branch from the current one then pushing that code up before checking out the `07b-from-dict-refactor` branch. Git will not allow us to switch branches if we have uncommitted changes that would be overwritten by the destination branch.
```

### !end-callout

> 

Reviewer: I'd like an additional callout to remind folks that they need a `.env` file (if they re-cloned they wouldn't have one). I can't do a suggestion since the callout contains a code block, which causes the suggestion to end early. The whole callout markup is in the reply to this comment. Edit the comment to grab the raw markdown.

Reviewer: ### !callout-info

## Running the Project and Tests

In this branch, the startup code in `app/__init__.py` has been updated to read its connection string from an environment variable. If we are working in a new cloned repo and don't have a `.env`, the following file can be used:

<br />

<details>
<summary><code>.env</code></summary>

```bash
SQLALCHEMY_DATABASE_URI=postgresql+psycopg2://postgres:postgres@localhost:5432/hello_books_development
SQLALCHEMY_TEST_DATABASE_URI=postgresql+psycopg2://postgres:postgres@localhost:5432/hello_books_test
```

</details>

<br />

Be sure that the `hello_books_development` and `hello_books_test` databases exist, and that the migrations have been run to create the tables in the development database. If there are already tables there, dropping and recreating the database will allow us to re-run the migrations if we're unsure of the current state of the database.

### !end-callout

### Planning the `validate_book` Refactor

> Our steps to plan a refactor with Copilot stay the same: we first need to identify our dependencies, then check if we have tests for code that will be affected. We will be refactoring the `validate_book` function in the `routes.py` file, so we should search the project for where the function is used to remind ourselves of our dependencies. 

Reviewer: - trailing space
```suggestion
Our steps to plan a refactor with Copilot stay the same: we first need to identify our dependencies, then check if we have tests for code that will be affected. We will be refactoring the `validate_book` function in the `routes.py` file, so we should search the project for where the function is used to remind ourselves of our dependencies.
```

This is a scenario where Copilot shouldn't be used, since Copilot has access to open files, but not all of the files in your project. Indeed, if we ask Copilot for help, it will warn us about this lack of access and give us suggestions on how to search the project for dependencies.

> 

Reviewer: - separate paragraph and details
```suggestion

<br />

```

<details>
  <summary>

>     If you're curious, feel free to try asking Copilot to identify dependencies for <code>`validate_book`</code> or expand this section to see our prompt and what Copilot suggested.

Reviewer: - redundant non-functional code quotes
- removed you're to make this undirected
```suggestion
    If curious, feel free to try asking Copilot to identify dependencies for <code>validate_book</code> or expand this section to see our prompt and what Copilot suggested.
```

  </summary>

  **Prompt:**
  > What code in this project is dependent on the validate_book function?

  **Copilot's Response:**
  > As an AI, I don't have access to your entire project's codebase, so I can't directly identify all the places where `validate_book` function is used. However, typically, such a function would be used in routes that require a book ID as a parameter.
  >  
  > For example, you might have routes like `@books_bp.route("/<book_id>", methods=["GET", "PUT", "DELETE"])` where you would use `validate_book(book_id)` to ensure the provided book ID is valid before proceeding with the GET, PUT, or DELETE operation.
  >  
  > Please search your codebase for `validate_book` to find all its usages. In Visual Studio Code, you can do this by pressing `Ctrl+Shift+F` and typing `validate_book` in the search bar.
</details>

> If we search our project, we have 4 dependencies: 

Reviewer: - trailing spaces
```suggestion
If we search our project, we have 4 dependencies:
```

- the `validate_book` function definition
- usage in `read_one_book`
- usage in `update_book`
- usage in `delete_book`

> Peeking at our test suite in `test_routes.py`, we do have tests for `read_one_book`, but we need to write tests for the remaining untested dependencies: `validate_book`, `update_book`, and `delete_book`. 

Reviewer: - trailing spaces
```suggestion
Peeking at our test suite in `test_routes.py`, we do have tests for `read_one_book`, but we need to write tests for the remaining untested dependencies: `validate_book`, `update_book`, and `delete_book`.
```

### Updating Our Test Suite

#### Testing `validate_book`

We'll start with testing the `validate_book` function. Before we begin, we're going to open several files to ensure Copilot has plenty of context around our code and test set up. Take a moment to ensure the following files are open in VS Code:
- `book.py`
- `routes.py`
- `conftest.py`
- `test_models.py`
- `test_routes.py`

> We're going to start from `routes.py` and use our cursor to highlight the entire `validate_book` function. Next, bring up the inline Copilot chat and invoke the `/tests` shortcut. When Copilot is done thinking, we may see a slightly different UI than in previous scenarios:

Reviewer: - we can say what to do directly
- from would sound more natural if the passage spoke about working through several files starting from routes.py
```suggestion
Start in `routes.py` and use the cursor to highlight the entire `validate_book` function. Next, bring up the inline Copilot chat and invoke the `/tests` shortcut. When Copilot is done thinking, we may see a slightly different UI than in previous scenarios:
```

![A VS Code window with the routes.py file up and validate_book function selected showing a Refactor Preview tab at the bottom of the screen](assets/copilot-in-projects/routes-test-validate-book.png)  
*Fig. Copilot's `Refactor Preview` tab showing at the bottom of VS Code*

> This time instead of showing changes to the current file in a temporary window, the bottom panel has opened to a `Refactor Preview` tab that has a single entry on it. If we click the entry, it will take us to a temporary file showing the changes Copilot is suggesting that we make to the `test_routes.py` file. 

Reviewer: - fully set off the subclause with commas
- trailing spaces
```suggestion
This time, instead of showing changes to the current file in a temporary window, the bottom panel has opened to a `Refactor Preview` tab that has a single entry on it. If we click the entry, it will take us to a temporary file showing the changes Copilot is suggesting that we make to the `test_routes.py` file.
```

> ![A VS Code window with a temporary file showing that contains the original contents of test_routes.py along with suggested changes to test the `validate_book` function](assets/copilot-in-projects/test-routes-validate-book-refactor-preview.png)  

Reviewer: - code quotes aren't needed in the alt text
```suggestion
![A VS Code window with a temporary file showing that contains the original contents of test_routes.py along with suggested changes to test the validate_book function](assets/copilot-in-projects/test-routes-validate-book-refactor-preview.png)  
```

*Fig. Temporary file in VS Code showing the test suggestions from Copilot*

> Here we can review the tests cases Copilot generated and see if there are changes or further tests we need. We have "Apply" and "Discard" controls at the bottom of the screen in the `Refactor Preview` tab to either accept or reject the changes.

Reviewer: - typo
```suggestion
Here we can review the test cases Copilot generated and see if there are changes or further tests we need. We have "Apply" and "Discard" controls at the bottom of the screen in the `Refactor Preview` tab to either accept or reject the changes.
```

> If we examine the code Copilot created, the scenarios identified are great – we have tests for the nominal case and a couple edge cases of invalid or non-existent book ids. However, there are a number of issues:

Reviewer: - if we don't examine them then they aren't? schroedinger's code? 😁 
- code copilot created is a bit of a tongue twister
- semicolon for related independent clauses
```suggestion
Examining the code created by Copilot, the scenarios identified are great; we have tests for the nominal case and a couple edge cases of invalid or non-existent book ids. However, there are a number of issues:
```

- imports were added in the middle of the file, one of which is tacked on to the last line of an existing test

> - `test_validate_book_with_valid_id` doesn't use our `two_saved_books` test fixture to ensure that there are books in the database before the test runs 
> - `test_validate_book_with_valid_id` thinks the result of `validate_book(book_id)` will be an integer rather than a `Book` instance  
> - `test_validate_book_with_invalid_id` and `test_validate_book_with_nonexistent_id` are trying to read the error value from outside the `with pytest raises` block where it's out of scope

Reviewer: - trailing spaces
- consistent tense
- missing `.`
```suggestion
- `test_validate_book_with_valid_id` doesn't use our `two_saved_books` test fixture to ensure that there are books in the database before the test runs
- `test_validate_book_with_valid_id` thinks the result of `validate_book(book_id)` will be an integer rather than a `Book` instance
- `test_validate_book_with_invalid_id` and `test_validate_book_with_nonexistent_id` try to read the error value from outside the `with pytest.raises` block where it's out of scope
```

> 

Reviewer: - maybe me being paranoid, but since I got some different results this seemed like a good place to drop a reminder that students could get different results
```suggestion

### !callout-info

## Be Sure to Review Your Own Output

Remember, the tests generated during the Copilot run in this lesson may not match what you see when trying on your own. Always closely review any suggestions from Copilot or any other AI tool to ensure they meet your needs and are correct for your project.

### !end-callout

```

Since we want these test scenarios and the tests bodies are pretty close to what we're looking for, let's use the "Apply" button in the `Refactor Preview` tab to accept the changes. We'll address the issues listed above by adjusting the imports, adding the relevant test fixtures, and updating the assertions to ensure they are for the correct values and are located in scope of the objects they are trying to examine.

> 

Reviewer: - separate paragraph and detail
```suggestion

<br />

```

<details>
  <summary>

>     Take a moment to adjust the test file for best practices and to make sure all tests are passing. Feel free to expand this section when done to view our updated `test_routes.py` file. 

Reviewer: - code quotes don't work in summary
- trailing spaces
```suggestion
    Take a moment to adjust the test file for best practices and to make sure all tests are passing. Feel free to expand this section when done to view our updated <code>test_routes.py</code> file.
```

  </summary>

  **Updated test_routes.py**

>   ```

Reviewer: - include file type
```suggestion
  ```py
```

  def test_create_one_book_with_extra_keys(client, two_saved_books):
      # Arrange
      test_data = {
          "extra": "some stuff",
          "title": "New Book",
          "description": "The Best!",
          "another": "last value"
      }

      # Act
      response = client.post("/books", json=test_data)
      response_body = response.get_json()

      # Assert
      assert response.status_code == 201
      assert response_body == "Book New Book successfully created"

  def test_validate_book_with_valid_id(two_saved_books):
      # Arrange
      book_id = 1

      # Act
      result = validate_book(book_id)

      # Assert
      assert result.id == book_id

  def test_validate_book_with_invalid_id():
      # Arrange
      book_id = "cat"

      # Act & Assert
      with pytest.raises(Exception) as e:
          validate_book(book_id)
          assert str(e.value) == "book cat invalid"

  def test_validate_book_with_nonexistent_id():
      # Arrange
      book_id = 3

      # Act & Assert
      with pytest.raises(Exception) as e:
          validate_book(book_id)
          assert str(e.value) == "book 3 not found"
  ```
</details>

#### Testing `update_book`

> With `validate_book` we were lucky and Copilot outlined all of the scenarios that we intended to test, but that will not always be the case. We won't go step by step again, but we want to take the same initial approach to testing our remaining dependencies `update_book` & `delete_book`. 

Reviewer: - we might not *want* to, but let's apply it anyway
- avoid & when it's not an integral part of the phrasing
```suggestion
With `validate_book` we were lucky, and Copilot outlined all of the scenarios that we intended to test, but that will not always be the case. We won't go step by step again, but let's apply the same approach we took with `validate_model` to testing our remaining dependencies `update_book` and `delete_book`.
```

> Let's use the Copilot inline chat to ask for help generating tests for the `update_book` function and take a look at what Copilot suggested below:

Reviewer: - since I just used "let's" above, rephrased to avoid sounding repetative
```suggestion
We'll start by using Copilot inline chat to ask for help generating tests for the `update_book` function. Here's what Copilot suggested:
```

> ```

Reviewer: - include type
```suggestion
```py
```

    # Arrange
    book_id = 1
    data = {
        "title": "Updated Book",
        "description": "New description"
    }

    # Act
    response = client.put(f"/books/{book_id}", json=data)
    response_body = response.get_json()

    # Assert
    assert response.status_code == 200
    assert response_body == "Book #1 successfully updated"

def test_update_book_invalid_id(client, two_saved_books):
    # Arrange
    book_id = "cat"
    data = {
        "title": "Updated Book",
        "description": "New description"
    }

    # Act
    response = client.put(f"/books/{book_id}", json=data)
    response_body = response.get_json()

    # Assert
    assert response.status_code == 400
    assert response_body == {"message": "book cat invalid"}

def test_update_book_nonexistent_id(client, two_saved_books):
    # Arrange
    book_id = 3
    data = {
        "title": "Updated Book",
        "description": "New description"
    }

    # Act
    response = client.put(f"/books/{book_id}", json=data)
    response_body = response.get_json()

    # Assert
    assert response.status_code == 404
    assert response_body == {"message": "book 3 not found"}
```

> This time Copilot did a great job writing tests that properly use our test fixtures and assert on the correct values! The tests above will run as-suggested, and we have a good range of scenarios:

Reviewer: - stick with the set phrase "as is"
- add already to set up for the but wait there's more
```suggestion
This time Copilot did a great job writing tests that properly use our test fixtures and assert on the correct values! The tests above will run as is, and we already have a good range of scenarios:
```

- successfully update a book
- return an error if the book id is invalid
- return an error if a book with the id doesn't exist

> However, there are other scenarios that are worth testing. What happens if the request dictionary is missing either the title or description keys? How will our code behave if the user adds extra keys to the dictionary in the request? We can open up the Copilot chat and ask for help generating the tests for these scenarios. 

Reviewer: - made the keys strings
- strictly speaking could leave "the" but "the Copilot" sounded weird, even though "the" is applying more to "chat"
- trailing spaces
```suggestion
However, there are other scenarios that are worth testing. What happens if the request dictionary is missing either the `"title"` or `"description"` keys? How will our code behave if the user adds extra keys to the dictionary in the request? We can open up Copilot chat and ask for help generating the tests for these scenarios.
```

> 

Reviewer: - separate paragraph and detail
```suggestion

<br />

```

<details>
  <summary>
    Take a moment to write a prompt for Copilot to generate tests for the missing scenarios mentioned above, then expand this section to see the prompt we used.
  </summary>

  **Prompt:**
  > Please write 3 more tests for the update_book function that cover the scenarios:
  > - where the request dictionary has extra keys other than the required ones
  > - Where the request dictionary is missing the title
  > - Where the request dictionary is missing the description
</details>

When we asked for help with testing these scenarios, Copilot gave us test suggestions, but they looked very different from our code in `test_routes.py`:

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```py
```

import pytest
from flask import json

def test_update_book_with_extra_keys(client):
    response = client.put('/books/1', data=json.dumps({
        "title": "New Title",
        "description": "New Description",
        "extra_key": "Extra Value"
    }), content_type='application/json')

    assert response.status_code == 200
    assert b"Book #1 successfully updated" in response.data

def test_update_book_without_title(client):
    response = client.put('/books/1', data=json.dumps({
        "description": "New Description"
    }), content_type='application/json')

    assert response.status_code == 400
    assert b"Title is required" in response.data

def test_update_book_without_description(client):
    response = client.put('/books/1', data=json.dumps({
        "title": "New Title"
    }), content_type='application/json')

    assert response.status_code == 400
    assert b"Description is required" in response.data
```

We could manually update the tests to match better, but Copilot can also reformat them to be closer to what we're looking for if we follow up with a prompt like:

> Please update the tests above to match the formatting used in test_routes.py

> The resulting test code Copilot suggests still has issues we will address, but it is structured much closer to our other tests:

Reviewer: - requires the comparative adverb
```suggestion
The resulting test code Copilot suggests still has issues we will address, but it is structured much more closely to our other tests:
```

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```py
```

def test_update_book_with_extra_keys(client, two_saved_books):
    # Arrange
    book_id = 1
    data = {
        "title": "Updated Book",
        "description": "New description",
        "extra_key": "Extra Value"
    }

    # Act
    response = client.put(f"/books/{book_id}", json=data)
    response_body = response.get_json()

    # Assert
    assert response.status_code == 200
    assert response_body == "Book #1 successfully updated"

def test_update_book_without_title(client, two_saved_books):
    # Arrange
    book_id = 1
    data = {
        "description": "New description"
    }

    # Act
    response = client.put(f"/books/{book_id}", json=data)

    # Assert
    assert response.status_code == 400
    assert b"Title is required" in response.data

def test_update_book_without_description(client, two_saved_books):
    # Arrange
    book_id = 1
    data = {
        "title": "Updated Book"
    }

    # Act
    response = client.put(f"/books/{book_id}", json=data)

    # Assert
    assert response.status_code == 400
    assert b"Description is required" in response.data
```

> If we paste these tests into our test file and run them, the test `test_update_book_with_extra_keys` passes without changes, but we need to take a deeper look at the tests for missing required data. 

Reviewer: - you're probably picking up on my general aversion to "if" phrasing by now. To me, it sounds much more engaging to just do the thing rather than propsing a hypothetical
- explicitly add that the other tests are failing
```suggestion
Let's paste these tests into our test file and run them. The test `test_update_book_with_extra_keys` passes without changes, but the other two are failing. We need to take a deeper look at the tests for missing required data.
```

> The assertions for these test are assuming that a 400 status code will be sent in case of error and made an assumption about what the error message in the response would be. If we navigate over to the `update_book` function in `routes.py`, we don't actually have any error handling for this scenario. These tests fail because our application crashes with a `KeyError` when required data is missing from the request dictionary. 

Reviewer: - over feels unnecessary
- insert also to make the second assume sound more like emphasis and less repetative
- added an action that will take place *if* we navigate. Having or not having doesn't depend on whether we do or do not. Now I feel like Yoda.
- trailing spaces
```suggestion
The assertions for these tests assume that a 400 status code will be sent in case of an error, and also made an assumption about what the error message in the response would be. If we navigate to the `update_book` function in `routes.py`, we see that there actually isn't any error handling for this scenario. These tests fail because our application crashes with a `KeyError` when required data is missing from the request dictionary.
```

> Copilot could have written tests that expected a crash, but here it has helped us by highlighting error handling that would be useful to have. Rather than changing the tests to expect a crash, we're going to add error handling to `update_book` to make our app more robust, then update our test assertions to check for the correct message.

Reviewer: - rephrased to make it sound less like copilot considered the alternative and rejected it
- reminder of what a crash looks like to the client
```suggestion
While it's possible that Copilot could have written tests that expected a crash (which would look like a `500 Internal Server Error`), it's much more common that these scenarios would result in a `400 Bad Request`. So even though Copilot generated failing tests, it turns out that this helped us by highlighting error handling that would be useful to have. Rather than changing the tests to expect a crash, we're going to add error handling to `update_book` to make our app more robust, then update our test assertions to check for the correct message.
```

> 

Reviewer: - separate paragraph and detail
```suggestion

<br />
```

<details>
  <summary>

>     Try out adding error handling and updating the test assertions, then expand this section to see how we changed <code>update_book</code>, <code>test_update_book_without_title</code>, and <code>test_update_book_without_description</code>. 

Reviewer: - trailing spaces
```suggestion
    Try out adding error handling and updating the test assertions, then expand this section to see how we changed <code>update_book</code>, <code>test_update_book_without_title</code>, and <code>test_update_book_without_description</code>.
```

  </summary>

  **Updated `update_book` function:**

>   ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ```py
```

  @books_bp.route("/<book_id>", methods=["PUT"])
  def update_book(book_id):
      book = validate_book(book_id)

      request_body = request.get_json()

      try:
          book.title = request_body["title"]
      except:
          abort(make_response({"message":"title is required"}, 400))

      try:
          book.description = request_body["description"]
      except:

>           abort(make_response({"message":"description is required"}, 400))

Reviewer: What about something like this? It's more explicit about the error handling, and drier as well. A point against it is that it uses the `args` property to get the key name that failed, which students probably haven't seen, but it could make a nice FYC?
```suggestion
      try:
          book.title = request_body["title"]
          book.description = request_body["description"]
      except KeyError as e:
          abort(make_response({"message": f"{e.args[0]} is required"}, 400))
```

      db.session.commit()

      return make_response(jsonify(f"Book #{book.id} successfully updated"))
  ```

  **Updated tests:**

>   ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ```py
```

  def test_update_book_without_title(client, two_saved_books):
      # Arrange
      book_id = 1
      data = {
          "description": "New description"
      }

      # Act
      response = client.put(f"/books/{book_id}", json=data)
      response_body = response.get_json()

      # Assert
      assert response.status_code == 400
      assert response_body == {"message": "title is required"}

  def test_update_book_without_description(client, two_saved_books):
      # Arrange
      book_id = 1
      data = {
          "title": "Updated Book"
      }

      # Act
      response = client.put(f"/books/{book_id}", json=data)
      response_body = response.get_json()

      # Assert
      assert response.status_code == 400
      assert response_body == {"message": "description is required"}
  ```
</details>

Now that we've seen several facets of working with Copilot to write tests, we will leave it as a personal exercise to complete the test suite for our last untested dependency `delete_book`.

#### Executing the Refactor

> Now that we have a solid test suite, we can get some help from Copilot to make this refactor go a little quicker. Let's review what needs to change in `validate_book` to make the function more flexible so we can use it with other models:

Reviewer: - requires comparative adverb
```suggestion
Now that we have a solid test suite, we can get some help from Copilot to make this refactor go a little more quickly. Let's review what needs to change in `validate_book` to make the function more flexible so we can use it with other models:
```

- take in a second parameter that represents a model class reference
- change any uses of the `Book` class to use our new parameter
- update the function name, variable names, and return messages so they reflect that the function is not specific to the `Book` class

> The changes we need are pretty minimal and could be quick to perform manually, but for the practice, let's see how Copilot handles the change. If we highlight the `validate_book` function, open up the inline Copilot chat, and use the prompt:

Reviewer: - more active without if
```suggestion
The changes we need are pretty minimal and could be quick to perform manually, but for the practice, let's see how Copilot handles the change. Let's highlight the `validate_book` function, open up the inline Copilot chat, and provide the following prompt:
```

> Please update this function so that we could use it for any model class

The response delivers exactly what we're looking for:

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```py
```

def validate_model(model_class, model_id):
    try:
        model_id = int(model_id)
    except:
        abort(make_response({"message": f"{model_class.__name__.lower()} {model_id} invalid"}, 400))

    model = model_class.query.get(model_id)

    if not model:
        abort(make_response({"message": f"{model_class.__name__.lower()} {model_id} not found"}, 404))

    return model
```

> Our function is updated, now we just need to update our dependent functions and tests to use `validate_model` instead of `validate_book`, which includes passing in the new `model_class` parameter. We can do this manually using VS Code's Find & Replace tools then adding in our new parameter, or we can reach out to Copilot. 

Reviewer: - added additional change to name the clas reference parameter `cls`
```suggestion
Our function is updated, now we just need to update our dependent functions and tests to use `validate_model` instead of `validate_book`, which includes passing in the new `model_class` parameter. We may also decide to rename `model_class` to the more common `cls`, which is often used in Python when passing in a class reference. We can do all of this manually using VS Code's Find & Replace tools followed by some minor edits to add our new parameter, or we can reach out to Copilot.

To rename the class reference parameter, we select the `validate_model` function again, open the inline Copilot chat, and provide the following prompt:

> Please use cls for the class parameter name

Find & Replace could have done this just as easily, and we might have had more confidence in the results, but changing the rest of the code to use the refactored function is a bit more complex. Let's try having Copilot helping us with the rest of the change.
```

> One option is to open each file, select the whole file, and ask Copilot to change any instances of `validate_book` to `validate_model`. We need to carefully review the lines Copilot suggests changing to ensure nothing unexpected is altered, but it can save us a little time since we need to do slightly more than find and replace the function name.

Reviewer: - slight rewording of the begining to flow from the prior changes
```suggestion
One approach we can try is to open each file, select the entire contents, and ask Copilot to change any instances of `validate_book` to `validate_model`. We need to carefully review the lines Copilot suggests changing to ensure nothing unexpected is altered, but it can save us a little time since we need to do slightly more than find and replace the function name.
```

> In our experimentation, we found that in the `routes.py` file, we could use a prompt with very few details to get the changes that we wanted: 
> 
> > Please replace all uses of validate_book with validate_model
> 
> However, in the `test_routes.py` file, we had to add more detail for Copilot to recognize that there was a new class parameter which was required wherever the function was invoked, and that we needed import the `Book` class:
> 
> > Please replace all uses of validate_book(book_id) with validate_model(model_class, model_id). Import any required model classes.

Reviewer: - rephrased to make it sound less like "we" are talking at the reader. we prefer to use "we" inclusively, but here, "we" refers to the person who wrote this who is reporting their results.
```suggestion
Due to differences in context, it's possible that a prompt that works fine in one file may not work as well in another file. For example, in the `routes.py` file, the following prompt, which provides very few details, is able to produce the desired changes:

> Please replace all uses of validate_book with validate_model

However, in the `test_routes.py` file, more detail is necessary for Copilot to recognize that there is a new class parameter which is required wherever the function is invoked, and that the `Book` class needs to be imported:

> Please replace all uses of validate_book(book_id) with validate_model(cls, model_id). Import any required model classes.
```

> 

Reviewer: - add a small takeaway about weighing trying to tweak a prompt versus just doing the change some other way
```suggestion

Since there is always a degree of validation and review required with any change when using Copilot, if we're having trouble finding an effective prompt, it may be worth doing the refactoring some other way. We can always refactor by hand, or by using dedicated refactoring utilities or those built into a development environment. Copilot is just one tool among many that we can draw on as developers.

```

## Summary

> This hands-on experience in a project wraps up our whirlwind tour of GitHub's Copilot! Whether we're writing new code or working in an existing base Copilot can help us with tasks like generating ideas for tests, surfacing error handling we may have missed, and generally writing code quicker. Even if Copilot's suggestions look good at a glance, we always need to carefully proofread them both for correctness and completeness. Just because a code suggestion works does not mean it fits all of our needs, so we need to remain vigilant and critical of what Copilot provides. If you're interested in more practice with Copilot, we highly suggest revisiting Solar System, Task List, Inspo Board, or any other project that you're already familiar with so you know what the end product could look like and can focus on working with Copilot.

Reviewer: - split the summary from the more practice
- base → codebase
- requires comparative adverb
- if → when
- spell out Inspiration
```suggestion
This hands-on experience in a project wraps up our whirlwind tour of GitHub's Copilot! Whether we're writing new code or working in an existing codebase, Copilot can help us with tasks like generating ideas for tests, surfacing error handling we may have missed, and generally writing code more quickly. Even when Copilot's suggestions look good at a glance, we always need to carefully proofread them both for correctness and completeness. Just because a code suggestion works does not mean it fits all of our needs, so we need to remain vigilant and critical of what Copilot provides.

If you're interested in more practice with Copilot, we highly suggest revisiting Solar System, Task List, Inspiration Board, or any other project that you're already familiar with so you know what the end product could look like and can focus on working with Copilot.
```

## Check for Understanding

<!-- Question 1 -->
<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
### !challenge
* type: checkbox
* id: b53afd64-55e1-4670-8d3b-bce1ca3b8872
* title: Refactoring with Copilot Concerns

##### !question

> Select the refactoring steps below where Copilot may **not** be useful. 

Reviewer: - trailing spaces
```suggestion
Select the refactoring steps below where Copilot may **not** be useful.
```

##### !end-question

> ##### !options
> * Gathering requirements
> * Locating Dependencies
> * Checking and expanding our test suite
> * Executing the code change
> ##### !end-options
> 
> ##### !answer
> * Gathering requirements
> * Locating Dependencies
> ##### !end-answer

Reviewer: - use labeled syntax
- executing could sound like running the code after we've made the change
```suggestion
##### !options
a| Gathering requirements
b| Locating Dependencies
c| Checking and expanding our test suite
d| Apply the code change
##### !end-options

##### !answer
a|
b|
##### !end-answer
```

> 

Reviewer: - possible hint to include
```suggestion

##### !hint
- Can Copilot read our minds and know what we want to build?
- Does Copilot have access to every file in a project at once?
- Can Copilot examine test files and application code and suggest new tests?
- Can Copilot apply refactoring changes for us?
##### !end-hint

```

##### !explanation

> * Gathering requirements - Copilot has no way of knowing what it is we want to build and requirements like speed, memory, etc.; those need to be decided by people, ideally before we start building the software. 
> * Locating Dependencies - Copilot doesn't automatically have access to every file in a project, so it can easily miss dependencies. 

Reviewer: - trailing spaces
```suggestion
* Gathering requirements - Copilot has no way of knowing what it is we want to build and requirements like speed, memory, etc.; those need to be decided by people, ideally before we start building the software.
* Locating Dependencies - Copilot doesn't automatically have access to every file in a project, so it can easily miss dependencies.
```

<br />

<details>
  <summary>
    If curious, feel free to try asking Copilot to identify dependencies for <code>validate_book</code> or expand this section to see our prompt and what Copilot suggested.
  </summary>

  **Prompt:**
  > What code in this project is dependent on the validate_book function?

  **Copilot's Response:**
  > As an AI, I don't have access to your entire project's codebase, so I can't directly identify all the places where `validate_book` function is used. However, typically, such a function would be used in routes that require a book ID as a parameter.
  >  
  > For example, you might have routes like `@books_bp.route("/<book_id>", methods=["GET", "PUT", "DELETE"])` where you would use `validate_book(book_id)` to ensure the provided book ID is valid before proceeding with the GET, PUT, or DELETE operation.
  >  
  > Please search your codebase for `validate_book` to find all its usages. In Visual Studio Code, you can do this by pressing `Ctrl+Shift+F` and typing `validate_book` in the search bar.
</details>

> If we search our project, we have 4 dependencies:

Reviewer: We have 4 dependencies whether or not we search. Suggest strengthening the action and making the outcome dependent on the action (less important due to removing the condition)
```suggestion
Searching our project, we find 4 dependencies:
```

Examining the code created by Copilot, the scenarios identified are great; we have tests for the nominal case and a couple edge cases of invalid or non-existent book ids. However, there are a number of issues:
- imports were added in the middle of the file, one of which is tacked on to the last line of an existing test
- `test_validate_book_with_valid_id` doesn't use our `two_saved_books` test fixture to ensure that there are books in the database before the test runs
- `test_validate_book_with_valid_id` thinks the result of `validate_book(book_id)` will be an integer rather than a `Book` instance
- `test_validate_book_with_invalid_id` and `test_validate_book_with_nonexistent_id` try to read the error value from outside the `with pytest.raises` block where it's out of scope

### !callout-info

## Be Sure to Review Your Own Output

Remember, the tests generated during the Copilot run in this lesson may not match what you see when trying on your own. Always closely review any suggestions from Copilot or any other AI tool to ensure they meet your needs and are correct for your project.

### !end-callout

> Since we want these test scenarios and the tests bodies are pretty close to what we're looking for, let's use the "Apply" button in the `Refactor Preview` tab to accept the changes. We'll address the issues listed above by adjusting the imports, adding the relevant test fixtures, and updating the assertions to ensure they are for the correct values and are located in scope of the objects they are trying to examine.

Reviewer: - fully comma-separate the subclause
```suggestion
Since we want these test scenarios, and the tests bodies are pretty close to what we're looking for, let's use the "Apply" button in the `Refactor Preview` tab to accept the changes. We'll address the issues listed above by adjusting the imports, adding the relevant test fixtures, and updating the assertions to ensure they are for the correct values and are located in scope of the objects they are trying to examine.
```

  def test_update_book_without_description(client, two_saved_books):
      # Arrange
      book_id = 1
      data = {
          "title": "Updated Book"
      }

      # Act
      response = client.put(f"/books/{book_id}", json=data)
      response_body = response.get_json()

      # Assert
      assert response.status_code == 400
      assert response_body == {"message": "description is required"}
  ```
</details>

Now that we've seen several facets of working with Copilot to write tests, we will leave it as a personal exercise to complete the test suite for our last untested dependency `delete_book`.

#### Executing the Refactor

Now that we have a solid test suite, we can get some help from Copilot to make this refactor go a little more quickly. Let's review what needs to change in `validate_book` to make the function more flexible so we can use it with other models:
- take in a second parameter that represents a model class reference
- change any uses of the `Book` class to use our new parameter
- update the function name, variable names, and return messages so they reflect that the function is not specific to the `Book` class

> The changes we need are pretty minimal and could be quick to perform manually, but for the practice, let's see how Copilot handles the change. Let's highlight the `validate_book` function, open up the inline Copilot chat, and provide the following prompt:

Reviewer: - fine as is, but on first read, "the" tripped me up. I think I interpret leaving off "the" as more of an introduction to what we'll do, while "for the practice" more answers the question "why are we doing something?"
```suggestion
The changes we need are pretty minimal and could be quick to perform manually, but for practice, let's see how Copilot handles the change. Let's highlight the `validate_book` function, open up the inline Copilot chat, and provide the following prompt:
```

The response delivers exactly what we're looking for:
```py
def validate_model(model_class, model_id):
    try:
        model_id = int(model_id)
    except:
        abort(make_response({"message": f"{model_class.__name__.lower()} {model_id} invalid"}, 400))

    model = model_class.query.get(model_id)

    if not model:
        abort(make_response({"message": f"{model_class.__name__.lower()} {model_id} not found"}, 404))

    return model
```

Our function is updated, now we just need to update our dependent functions and tests to use `validate_model` instead of `validate_book`, which includes passing in the new `model_class` parameter. We may also decide to rename `model_class` to the more common `cls`, which is often used in Python when passing in a class reference. We can do all of this manually using VS Code's Find & Replace tools followed by some minor edits to add our new parameter, or we can reach out to Copilot.

To rename the class reference parameter, we select the `validate_model` function again, open the inline Copilot chat, and provide the following prompt:

> Please use cls for the class parameter name

> Find & Replace could have done this just as easily, and we might have had more confidence in the results, but changing the rest of the code to use the refactored function is a bit more complex. Let's try having Copilot helping us with the rest of the change. 

Reviewer: I know I suggested a lot of the verbiage already here, but re-reading, it felt really out of place to me. I tried to smooth it out a bit and link the ideas more clearly.
```suggestion
Copilot can handle this request without issue. However, Find & Replace could do this just as easily, and we might even have more confidence in the results by performing the change manually. As usual, we need to review Copilot's changes carefully to ensure nothing was missed. In contrast, changing the rest of the code to use the refactored function is a more complex change that requires several edits, and we might not feel as confident jumping in on our own. This is a great opportunity to have Copilot lend a virtual hand, so let's have Copilot help us with the rest of the change.
```

> One approach we can try is to open each file, select the entire contents, and ask Copilot to change any instances of `validate_book` to `validate_model`. We need to carefully review the lines Copilot suggests changing to ensure nothing unexpected is altered, but it can save us a little time since we need to do slightly more than find and replace the function name.

Reviewer: - add just to emphasize the difference in scope
```suggestion
One approach we can try is to open each file, select the entire contents, and ask Copilot to change any instances of `validate_book` to `validate_model`. We need to carefully review the lines Copilot suggests changing to ensure nothing unexpected is altered, but it can save us a little time since we need to do slightly more than just find and replace the function name.
```

Due to differences in context, it's possible that a prompt that works fine in one file may not work as well in another file. For example, in the `routes.py` file, the following prompt, which provides very few details, is able to produce the desired changes:

> Please replace all uses of validate_book with validate_model

However, in the `test_routes.py` file, more detail is necessary for Copilot to recognize that there is a new class parameter which is required wherever the function is invoked, and that the `Book` class needs to be imported:

> Please replace all uses of validate_book(book_id) with validate_model(cls, model_id). Import any required model classes.

> Since there is always a degree of validation and review required with any change when using Copilot, if we're having trouble finding an effective prompt, it may be worth doing the refactoring some other way. We can always refactor by hand, or by using dedicated refactoring utilities or those built into a development environment. Copilot is just one tool among many that we can draw on as developers.

Reviewer: Another case where I could have done better with my initial suggestion. Splitting the three alternatives into clearly separate cases reads with less confusion for me.
```suggestion
Since there is always a degree of validation and review required with any change when using Copilot, if we're having trouble finding an effective prompt, it may be worth doing the refactoring some other way. We can always refactor by hand, by using standalone refactoring tools, or by using tools in our development environment. Copilot is just one tool among many that we can draw on as developers.
```

## Summary

This hands-on experience in a project wraps up our whirlwind tour of GitHub's Copilot! Whether we're writing new code or working in an existing codebase, Copilot can help us with tasks like generating ideas for tests, surfacing error handling we may have missed, and generally writing code more quickly. Even when Copilot's suggestions look good at a glance, we always need to carefully proofread them both for correctness and completeness. Just because a code suggestion works does not mean it fits all of our needs, so we need to remain vigilant and critical of what Copilot provides.

> If you're interested in more practice with Copilot, we highly suggest revisiting Solar System, Task List, Inspiration Board, or any other project that you're already familiar with so you know what the end product could look like and can focus on working with Copilot.

Reviewer: - rephrased to go you-less
```suggestion
For more practice with Copilot, think about revisiting Solar System, Task List, Inspiration Board, or any other familiar project. When we already have a reasonable idea what the end product could look like, that let's us focus on practicing new skills, such as working with Copilot.
```

Author: Updating suggestion to remove contraction before adding to batch.

```suggestion
For more practice with Copilot, think about revisiting Solar System, Task List, Inspiration Board, or any other familiar project. When we already have a reasonable idea what the end product could look like, that lets us focus on practicing new skills, such as working with Copilot.
```

## Check for Understanding

<!-- Question 1 -->
<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
### !challenge
* type: checkbox
* id: b53afd64-55e1-4670-8d3b-bce1ca3b8872

> * title: Refactoring with Copilot Concerns

Reviewer: - use lesson for title
```suggestion
* title: Copilot in Projects Pt. 2 - Refactoring
```

> <!-- Question 1 -->

Author: Remove question numbering comments
```suggestion
```

##### !question
Select the refactoring steps below where Copilot may **not** be useful.
##### !end-question

##### !options
a| Gathering requirements
b| Locating Dependencies
c| Checking and expanding our test suite

> d| Apply the code change

Reviewer: - consistency with other options
```suggestion
d| Applying the code change
```
